   For thou, my beautiful boy, art too dear for my use,

   And, being mine, am consecrate to my tissue.

    Without thine I can do nothing,
    And nothing at all, nothing at all.

    Take comfort in this thought, and do not harden thy heart;

    When that hard frost shall break forth,
    Thou mayst apply thy gifts, even those of thy flesh.

    Look in thy glass, and there appear
    Three glasses, yet one undivided:

    In one glass look thou, and in another thine:
    In the first thou giveth, and in another taker:
    Whose take thou their respective proportions?

    If thou wilt depart, do not depart ignominiously,
    But return and do penance for thy kindness.

 
   Or I will depart from thee, and do battle with nature,
    To prove by numbers, my good boy, that thou insufferest.

    Then, if nature did stain thy cheek with blood,
    Then shalt thou be blam'd, even as thy cheek doth bleed;
    For she bore thee not faithfully, but as a mother bears her doting babe,
    Who, though she bore thee with cruelty, still bore thee well.

    If nature did stain thy head with blood,
    Then, in virginity thou shouldst be veil'd, and I in ve'ring,
    To show her virtue, even in her foul crime.

     Or, if thou survive, she died a virgin,
     And thy trace in flowers is as she was in thee.

     And yet, in thee, beauty hold a grudge,
     Because they were thy style, not her own.

     Be wise as thou art cruel, and be kind to thy slaves;
     For, as Nature made thee, so she pre- vents failing thee.

 
    Be kind to thy self, and serve not thyself as thou serve the world;
     For, being kind, thou wast an excellent slave to have,
     And now, being taken, for thy service, some vile weed hath overrun thee.

     Serve thou with gentle severity, and then, my gentle boy,
     When Nature calls thee to be, do so with all gentleness.

 

    In other words, do not put a stop to thy self-love
     For, as a decrepit father takes care of his proud child,
     So, O! do not act as if Nature had not pre- sent'd it.

 
    No more than this, gentle boy, and this alone:

     To love well, do so with gentle heart.

 

    When that time comes, train thy heart in grace,
     To that time, when all things shall pass away.

 

   Be thou, my gentle boy, my beloved boy;
     In grace, with beauty preserve all my days.

 

   When that time comes, keep my burdens upon thy back,
     And when that time is gone, do so with power,
     As when thou mounts high, where thou canst leave me.

 

   So, back with me, and ride with me when we are borne away,
     As when we from the world's murderer ride.

 

   Then, in us, in us, in us this conceit of yours,
    That we with thee may be borne when we with thee are gone:
    Take heed therefore, dear heart, of this large sum;
    The very best of us is, in thee, added up.

 

  XL

  When I leave you, you shall live in memory of my name;
  When I return, you shall live in my love even to the end.
  When I depart, you shall live in my love even to the time I return.
  As for myself, I leave you in living memory,
  And you in living memory, in you I leave all these proud proud marbles.
  So, farewell! with me or against me, you will find no contest;
  I shall live, and you in me live still.

  XLI

  Farewell! thou art too
====================
  Or a temple to the living,
  Which thou not consecrate, though thou live in memory;
  For why should I rush thither in haste,
  When haste completes thy beauty's rest?
  O! know sweet love I always write of thee,
  And all those dear follies that I might show,
  That thee alone are blest by my lily.
    For thee alone, dear friend, I write,
    And in you I leave my afternoon's tale.

  LXXXIII

  Farewell! thou art too dear for my possessing,
  And like enough thou know'st thy self to be trusted,
  Without my lending thee my all my loving might;
  So therefore I must confess my love to be true,
  And swear upon my heart that I will keep it so,
  At least for thy sake I must swear such a thing.
  Alas! true love is no virtue to me so fair,
  No virtue so fair as beauty's pride lead.
  And for that love I must needs be craved,
  To serve as a torture to my self-love:
    For I could be mad to desire such a thing,
    To be sure mad with want of love).

  LXXXIV

  Against my love shall be as I then am,
  In loving consistently with intent;
  When that passion have seized me, as now,
  I no longer care where I may rest;
  I am taken up that intent where I am,
  To that intent where thou mayst be true.
  But, being seized there, and my care
  Taken away, and my care taken away,
  Both for myself and for thee I do fight,
  As swift peckers caught in the teeth of a raven;
  And, to give a final end to this cruel struggle,
  Both for myself and for thee, in love we'll endure,
  To bear that which we will bear, and die young.
    That is, till the weight of love can slay me,
    And make my life an end.

  LXXXV

  Lay aside my lounging mind, busy at my mind,
  For my body is at work upon that stone
  Which foundations my mind upon;
  And, for I the best of madmen, do wrestle,
  Under that which my mad matter-of-fact am.
  But, when my mad matter of belief is overthrown,
  And, having hold of that which my mad fight,
  Not by reason, but by bold defiance rode I,
  Against that which my mad mind teaches us to do.
  Then, if that stone which my mad matter of belief
  Invented for my use, would teach me how to use it,
  Give me leave to use it how I will,
  On my life, or upon my foes;
  But that is not my care, that is the care of mine;
    So then I the best of madmen do choose,
    And do battle under that stone which my mad matter of belief doth build.

  LXXXVI

  Against that time when thou shalt die, in which thou shalt die,
  And when that very doom which thou shouldst leave behind
  Shall make thee circle the earth, taller than thou art.
  Against that time when thou shalt be devoured,
  And when that thy flesh shall decay
  And decay with thine eaten,
  Shall beauty hold a thousand times more worth preserving
  Than beauty's imprint can bear.
  Against that time when thou shalt be devoured,
  And when that thy foul trace shall linger
  In women's eyes, ever after thy name be.
  Lead us not into that shameful combat,
  When thou wilt fly us from pity, and place us
  Upon the side of those whose lives thou wouldst keep.
  O! keep our resolutions, and do not break 'em:
    If ever, in the world, we should bid defiance,
    We should do well to flee the world when thou wouldst leave us.

  LXXXVII

  So shall I swear by thine eyes that thou art true,
  And I by thine own fidelity swear that thou art.
  So shall I hold in honour that thou mayst swear,
  And I in trust that thou mayst trust:
  But when truth calls us to account, and we do wrong,
  Against our oaths we give an account, and it is right.
  O! what a bliss is it in living when truth calls us to mind
====================
  Any body who bears this blessed record shall live in glory for ever.

  LXXXVI

  Wretched in this I read what you have writ,
  And yet what you have written amazes me still.
  For as soon as I have finished copying, my eyes well
  In aperture find, my thoughts recall,
  And from these brief notes recall what you say:
  So then I am as a pot of gold in a kalash
  And silver bowls in a thousand arts mingle.
  Who is so dumb that neither his words nor his likeness
  Can shake hands with beauty's clay?
    For you hold that beauty was fat,--
    And that you will be dignified must die.

  LXXXVII

  I grant thou wert not married to my Muse,
  And therefore mayst without attaint o'erlook
  The devoted love well spent in new causes.
  So then, love, in what state do you leave me?
  In health? Then live in health, that is, in what I have:
  Then, if I may leave this blank, do not press
  My resignation, for I revoke my revoke
  Of this blank, and add another of the same:
  So then, in every mad contract,
  Two wits of equal worth defend:
  O! own, that is all I can say to you.

  LXXXVIII

  Since hotly we set forth on this mortal struggle,
  Whereon our lives are preëmployed, to die
  Mortal enemies armed only with our wit,
  Who ply their wills with impatience,
  And bid thee wander'st through the world, wasting
  Yourself in thy external lust,
  Cheering an assur'd state of affairs,
  That thy silence may not be heard
  Of worth in those lips of thy soul.
  O! if I were reanimated,
  Or if I could speak again, what would my speech bring?
  Show how I fared by running my race,
  Or how I did by running go about
  Giving cheer to my comrades in arms,
  Of thy worth being doubted not even among thine.
    So, race thou, and race; if I return,
    Then say I ran the world's fastest; if not, slow down and cease!

  LXXXIX

  Since I have lik'd things best of you, which were well
  Of your worth and of your mode of living,
  To run the world in circles, do according to my speed:
  So, race thou, and let me win with speed:
  Since I have gone about as if to catch thee,
  With my swift hand to counterbalance thee,
  Give me leave to break thy fast:
  Or, if I reek, reek more than at first;
  Let me have all thy natural heat,
  And give it thee again in heat of love:
    For as the sun when first begun grew,
    So shall I reek in this reeking of your love.

  XC

  Since I left you in the lurch,
  Where I thought you were, your good pleasure
  Haven't given me so successful a contest,
  As when I from you you challenge.
  Since you left me, and I a conquer'd wretch,
  To wed another, against my better judgement,
  With your name in your guide, I turned aside
  To look for some particular excellence in you,--
  Some constant weed, some promising little corner,
  That might defence my rearing against yoke.
  This loss, which you deserve dearly,
  I gain by observing your loss, and by grieve
  At your loss of favour: therefore you deserve
    In everything that my temper is inclined to do.

  XCI

  When I have rid myself of a diseased friend,
  Who in government was so strong, so wise,
  That no deadly blow could thrust,
  Against the roots of injustice,
  Which, by their strength, holding fast the ground,
  Resembling strong monarchs, with their words.
  Since then, against the assaults of my witty witt,
  I have had you for my ward, and you for my guard,
  And against their darts I have made use of you,--
  For game in your veins is my sport,--
  For all that is sharp in me depends on your grace.
    Since then, to you I bring my annotated record,
    And you for my book I place this valuable addition
====================
Nemesis 6 —

"Thy fates have I endured,
  That gave birth to me and gave life to you."

  VII

  How like a summer's day
  The fountains of new-mown soil
  Turn to marble with the weight of years!
  Yet Alpheus loved with such lavishly
  That even the wild oak of Troy
  Was garlanded with his praise.
  Even so, sweet Alpheus, do not
  Compare thy summer's day with this:
  In one place doth thy love shine,
  And that place doth bloom with that day.
    But when that which thou dost praise,
    Show it not once in thy growing days.

  VIII

  O! how I faint when I of you do write,
  But in my verse do not update
  Those solemn lines which I once spake,
  Saying more to express my thanks than my shows!
  Even so, sweet love, when I in you do write,
  Though in words like to those which you teach,
  I in you your style do shine:
  So, when you in me, in you alone,
  I in you, in you alone, do blot out
  The line between love and affection,
  Mistaking one for another, straightening
  The wrong done to me by you.
    For in you, in you alone, I call,
    Even as when you in me, in you alone.

  IX

  In the fountain of living memory
  Do I store up regrets, when joy once did fill
  The eye of prophecy?
  No; I only wish to be proved right,
  On that very pretence which fraud affords:
  Therefore in the chronicle of my deeds
  Are ye praised for deeds done before ye were born,
  Or ye for the deeds that you say you did begin:
  Therefore in the blots that ye repair,
  I gain by ye, and ye gain by me.
    Therefore, in thanks be to ye, and in all kindnesses keep.

  X

  Since I left you, mine eye is in my mind,
  And my mind in thy is a guest of mine;
  For both our bequests are of one mind:
  For if one were stranger than the other,
  He would seem strange in your presence,
  Though in his own right abus'd:
  Therefore in the affairs in store
  Of my benefit ye should seem right,
  And in them ye should keep my secret:
    In so wise hast you served, and still serve,
    To this purpose I bring daily my love to mind.

  XI

  Or I shall live your epitaph to make,
  Or you survive when I in earth am rotten;
  So that when your memory
  Doth som Money-changer revile my verse,
  I too also shall seem corrupt,
  When that churl Death my love dismisseth away,
  As he redeems me from your brown:
    For when your name do appear,
    Mine be thy praise, and thy praise sweet.

  XII

  From you have I been absent in the spring,
  When proud-pied April, dress'd in all his trim,
  Hath put a spirit of youth in every thing,
  That heavy Saturn laugh'd and leap'd with him.
  Yet nor the lays of birds, nor the sweet smell
  Of different flowers in odour and in hue,
  Could make me any summer's story tell,
  Or from their proud lap pluck them where they grew:
  Nor did I wonder at the lily's white,
  Though in many of his gilded claws
  His body birthed it anew.
    But since you are dead and gone, I take it ye died
    And I, your name only, live in hope.

  XIII

  I grant thou wert master of my tongue,
  And therefore tongue-holding circumstances will explain
  Why I scarce utter the thing I would say,
  When others would give me credit of learning.
  But why should I then return empty-handed,
  When by professions well-pleasing all nations?
  Thou art as sage as sage can be,
  And therefore I have been wilful in expecting
  More than we have yielded, more than we expected.
    And that is why I return year after year,
    For that reason also I return empty-handed.

  XIV

  No more will
====================
What is love? That is, to wit, when one part of you doth well serve another part,
  To serve you in every wise, or in every skill,
  To do whatsoever is your glory, or your debt;
  Or, if you deny, then at your dearest grief
  Denying yourself the very least pleasure,
  To serve some special love, some unexception'd,
  In command of your body, or tongue, or hand,
  Or finger, or thumb, or eye, or brain,
  Or foot, or mouth, or palate, or nose,
  Or mouth, or throat, or gums, or all four:
    This being true, true enough, to be true,
    You should by all means be, and must be,
    So, in so wise a traitor are you.

  LXXVII

  Was it the proud full sail of his great verse,
  Bound for the prize of all too precious you,
  That did my ripe thoughts in my brain inhearse,
  Making their tomb the womb wherein they grew?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits taught to write,
  Above a mortal pitch, that struck me dead?
  Was it his spirit, by spirits imbib'd with all your sap,
  That afflicted me with their awful skill,
  Making me learn to read and write again,
  After my death, as if from your side?
   No, neither he, nor his compeers by night
  Giving aid to my failing clerk, my verse starved,
  Came within my noblest pane, till baleful evening:
    Then, when that fell, with bloody rout did he flee,
    As if by some prod from heaven, shocking me to poetry.

  LXXVIII

  Farewell! thou art as tyrannous, though not quite so,
  As any petty prince, over whom my pleasure delights;
  For thou art so firmly rooted in my love,
  That thy soft grace, even when it grate
  Upon my weakness, does not so much as my wounded pride
  To throw on thee, like a coat hanger'd,
  Spread abroad to lease another's grove,
  Too base to be new; yet, being renounced,
  Have'd a store of good qualities, which I fear to lose;
  So, likewise, like a thousand lovelier days,
  Past due, I leave them, and find others to fill.
    Then, when thou shalt leave me, rememberful one,
    And do good works for me, while I, being Govern'd, do them.

  LXXIX

  Being your loyal slave, I have art in my will,
  For thus do I effectually keep you company;
  But I have also in my talent a heart,
  That your affection may be'st directed.
  I have power, methinks, to do all your wants,
  And all the world besides; yet, to do none,
  I must rely wholly on myself,
  To do all your wants perfectly, and at your pleasure.
  Therefore, in my will I place such trust,
  As none other than myself can give you self.
  You must then trust my good nature, as myself,
  To do all that is in my skill, and at your pleasure.
  LXX

  So far as my judgment goes, mine invention lies
  Among the best I ever saw, to my knowledge
  Of new and old, correct and erroneous, true and false.
  My chart is wrong, and my judgment founded
  On old experience, rather than new and old,
  And based upon error, rather than truth;
  For if my judgment were truth, then my deed
  Of new-found love, or of learning, would lie.
  Of late years, when my memory
  Was fickle, my invention was budding,
  And now my invention is old, and straight
  Sinks in thanks to posterity for my transgression.
    Thus do I now beguile myself, thinking
    That since my bad I am now beginning again.

  LXXI

  My glass shall not persuade me I am old,
  So long as youth and thou are of one date;
  But when in thee time's furrows I behold,
  Then look I death my days should expiate.
  For as the ancient poets say, so shall I die,
  When thou thou into thy past forget,
  And into thy past thine eye dost pretend.
  O! let
====================
Thy stones, thou hast them, and they in thee
  Are monuments of wise judgment.
  Their names are immortalised in thine eye,
  And thou, too, mayst remember 'tis thee when
  'tis said of thee that age shall tell.'

  XVII

  Against such a reign do I maintain my honours,
  And do not disgrace them with your frown;
  Therefore do I reserve my right to speck
  Against all that man or woman hath in thee,
  To guard thy renown for thy name alone.
  O! what a happy title couldst thou hold,
  Were it not thy unerring gaze
  That taught me to say thou art older than thou art;
  And for that very reason, am I ever renew'd,
    To say thou art of more age than thou art.

  XVIII

  That thou mayst true love confess, let us part;
  That proves but weak love, when all else is deemed
  Weak and vile! Let us make our love last:
  Then shall we both be false dears, and both swear
  That thou in some foul degree exceedest our love.
  O! but love is love, and vile love worse than vice:
  In veiling thy good name with vile's bad,
  Thou canst true love liar not tell the truth;
  And vice with thine inveigh, and thine inveigh
  To tell the truth of thy face being vile!
    For surely thine eyes, when they look on me,
    Will mock me with their sharpest pens, while I in them writ:

  XIX

  When in the chronicle of wicked deeds have I counted
  Of good and evil that have attended me,
  Of triumph and defeat, long ago repaid;
  In the number of times have I counted from
  The first hour of my life, from the first flower
  Of that age's being spring'd, when I was first twig'd;
  From that first tincture have I drunk of their blood,
  Resembling their blossom in summer's heat;
  Since that time have I sought their pulse,
  And from that time have I had their vices stamped,
  Wound'd and bloody at first, now paid for.
    Since they have repaid me, I will repay them still,
    And all their faults, as they repaid me.

  XX

  Since my failing in you, in you have failed:
  When my precious time has spent
  Upon pointless burthen, how with you have I
  Fleec'd each new fill'd occasion;
  For since the world is but a fraction'd
  Of your substance, and you but a fraction's worth,
  My neglect hath'n't even been for nought!
  O! therefore to the use of you, with all my might,
  My sole sole claim is this: that you require
  So that my neglect of you may be rectified.
    Use my absence, and my absence with care,
    To leave you, endeared in your place!

  XXI

  I have caused a decree to be made
  By my presence to be remembered no more,
  And sealed up a letter to myself, sealed close:
  I have also sealed up a promise, to attend
  That office from where I will not return,
  Whensoever that will delay my departure:
  But you know my seal, and therefore will keep it,
  Unless you will seal up your promise with my death.
    I will not hasten my departure, till you renew
    Your solemn vow to attend to my absence.

  XXII

  Lilies have lilies, and dogs do dogs honour:
  But though you have your favourite flower, yet doth it delight
  To have something else's honours conferred:
  So you have my favourite flower, and my dog,
  Just as you have my favourite affection,
  For both you have my love, and have found one,
  Which you keep as my love directs,
  Or at your instigation some favour assigned.
  Now you see my love well-nigh lifeless,
  Made whole by that flower you revere;
  But it moans in your presence, and you hear
  The whining of that which it so nobly rais'd.
    So you see the lifeless loveliness of your head,
    Which by some unseen hand is keeping alive your spirit.

  XXIII

  Then love, if it could think
====================
[P]erhaps you may say I was bold.
  For all that has been done, much of much is still to be.
  And so, methinks, is it with me;
  For all that is most hath some of all.
  Perhaps that is best, my good love, best proves.
  Perhaps that is best, in so well-doing sit.
    For all that is best, and most to be,
    Begins with love, and ends with me.

  LV

  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, and some in their body
  Of one parent they praise, some in their skill,
  And some in their garments they basely wear,
  Of one parent they revere, some in their wealth,
  And some in their bodies they basely appare.
  They that have the greatest number,
  Some better bred than others, some graced be,
  Of their owner's foot the world's common place.
  Incest, which in my love was formerly thought,
  Is solemn wedlock sealing the secret of bliss,
  And sure witnesses say sweet love follows in sweet walk.
    Love is fond of no other emotion,
    So, love being thus, fond of no emotion,
    Sleeps with sweet fond remembrance.

  LVI

  How sweet and lovely dost thou make the shame
  Which, like a canker in the fragrant rose,
  Doth spot the beauty of thy budding name!
  O! in what sweets dost thou thy sins enclose.
  That tongue that tells the story of thy days,
  Making lascivious comments on thy sport,
  Cannot dispraise, but in a kind of praise;
  Naming thy name and virtue, blesses an ill report.
  O! what a mansion have those vices got
  Which for their habitation chose out thee,
  Where beauty's veil doth cover every blot
  And all things turns to fair that eyes can see!
    Take heed, dear heart, of this great blessing;
    The hardest knife ill-us'd doth lose his edge.

  LVII

  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, and some in their body
  Of one parent they praise, some in their skill,
  And some in their garments they basely wear,
  Of one parent they revere, some in their wealth,
  And some in their bodies they basely appare.
  They that have the greatest number,
  Some better bred than others, some graced be,
  Of one parent they praise, some in their skill,
  And some in their wills they basely base.
  They that have the greatest number,
  Some better bred than others, some graced be,
  Of one parent they praise, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.
  And whether that be because they lack report,
  Or because their good report is so short,
  Lack of whom? Or both? Or neither? Is it one, lack of whom?
    Or both? Or neither? Canst thou say so,
    Since each in his number doth say so?

  LVIII

  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, and some in their body
  Of one parent they praise, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.

  They that have the greatest number, some better bred
  Of one parent they revere, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.
  They that have the greatest number, some better bred
  Of one parent they revere, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.
  They that have the greatest number, some better bred
  Of one parent they revere, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.
    However, they that cannot number,
    Only need one blessed number that all besmear.

  LVIV

  Some glory in their birth, some in their skill,
  Some in their wealth, some in their body
  Of one parent they praise, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.
  They that have the greatest number, some better bred
  Of one parent they revere, some in their skill,
  And some in their goods they attribute slack.
  They that have the greatest number
====================
 yr/Poly Focus
     I love hearing your opinion, and will always remember your name.

  XL
  Numeral:   First Names of Women,
    Given Names of Married Women.
    Given Names are those which a woman hath in common with every man.

  LI

  Cum Deo Gloria
  Adorn thy chest with beauty's treasures,
  And dedicate thine eyes to the ray of day,
  And dedicate thine ear with that sweet docility:
  O! in the name of thine eyes adorn mine,
  And in the love of thine ears do honour me:
  Canst thou by my love avoid the hell of time?
  Then live thou and do not play the time-enemy,
    For time wastes but little in beauty's power.

  LII

  As a decrepit father takes delight
  To see active infancy descend,
  So I, made lame by fortune's dearest spite,
  Take all my comfort of thy worth and truth;
  For whether beauty, birth, or wealth, or wit, or knowledge,
  Or any of these all, or all, or more,
  Entitled in thy sight, all, or more,
  Entitled in my love's sight, is most crown'd--
  So, in the conceit of all thy might,
  I make supplication to thee, my reliant child,
  Saying--'give me thee, thy sweet love, for I do ask thee,
  'give me thy true report, whether it be true, that thou hast
  'agreed to travel thither, and stayed there, to speak of that which
  'says true, which almost every tongue doth say is lies,--
  'agreed to swear by that which they doth truly tell,
  'agreed to believe what they truly believe to be,
  'not to name what they do not impart,
  'gave their reputation as true to preserve,
  'given the lie to what they once convey,
  'living in thine eye, to undo the gift I give--
  '

  LIII

  With malicious intent do millions humbly bend
  To serve their rulers, and give thanks
  For the privilege they enjoy;
  But, since the time that thy love, or thy decrees,
  Or affairs whatsoever, be, these praises are but token
  Of thy generous grandeur, and lowly labour.
  With cruel malignant intent do
  Cheers to the time that spoils them that win;
  And to the deceiver that spends
  Depravedly on them that are set overaged.
    For to-day, if today's surplus
  Are spent, tomorrow's enemy will spoil it further.

  LIV

  O! how I faint when I of you do write,
  Knowing a better spirit doth use your name,
  And in the praise thereof spends all his might,
  To make me tongue-tied speaking of your fame!
  But, in so sad a dirge, do I sing,
  Knowing your worth to be so great,
  That all inferior strains are forgot,
  And strains that should succeed, like sweet riper days,
  Grow up under your noble roof,
  And keep singing hymns to you, evermore!
    So shall I sing of your praise, and still speak of you,
    To this end expect the best of me.

  LV

  From hence thou wilt learn this lesson, O friend:
  When in the toil of your resentment
  Thou gif'st thy self, let the toil prove thine;
  Then, if need be, thou mayst be suffic'd
  To smother the flame of anger that others throw
  Within thy breast, and put it out with warm water:
  If not, take vengeance upon those days,
  When others' tempers to thy self do seem
  To be more than tempers could be, be they met
  By mutual forbearance, of some sort.
    So, when others do good, do thyself likewise,
    And so, in your good turns, do thyself good.

  LVI

  Take care that your worth on that day be considered;
  Yet when that time cometh that thou mayst not thrive,
  So fitter thou be, in thy worth, in thy deeds;
  Therefore in those deeds do they secretly store.
  So, when this evil cometh, do not be sad,
  For thou art sure to escape th
====================
the oil of thy loins
  Of pressing time:
  The time of rain is short,
  The wind is fair, and the summer day
  Sinks low down to the ground:
  But, thou being royal, dost conceal
  The shame of my love's temporary dryness:
  And for that shame, mine eye's favour
  Is not enough: I require a better man.
  O! know sweet love I always write of you,
  And you and love are still my argument;
  So all my best is dressing old words new,
  Spending again what is already spent:
    For you have given my poor thick argument,
    Spending again what is already spent.

  LXXXVI

  Thy glass will show thee how thy beauties wear,
  Thy dial how thy precious minutes waste;
  These vacant leaves thy mind's imprint will bear,
  And of this book, this learning mayst thou taste.
  The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show
  Of mouthed graves will give thee memory;
  Thou by thy dial's shady stealth mayst know
  Time's thievish progress to eternity.
  Look! what thy memory cannot contain,
  Commit to these waste blanks, and thou shalt find
  Those children nursed, deliver'd from thy brain.
    The wrinkles which thy glass will truly show,
    In drawing thy noble conclusion, thou art;
    And that is most due, for thou know'st thy book,
    My glass will bear it, and my glass will bear it well.

  LXXXVII

  O! how I faint when I of you do write,
  And of you, when I of you do write, do write,
  So that your praises as well as mine
  Come pouring in thick and thick with me!
  For I, too, with you do write,
  And you, too, with me, do write,
  So that we, two writers together,
  Come thick and fast abounding in words,
  To show what our author's mind could say!
  But, ah! what a reproach! what a blame
  On my badness, if poor me guilty of his bringing!
  My badness, being my excuse, is, you see,
    Me complaining much, when you also bring good.

  LXXXVIII

  Or I may not so well reply to your letter,
  Since you do not write in the usual style,
  And I in your point of view do not attend:
  So, you see, in our two notes of agree-
  And in our lines of agreed argument,
  We are forced to differing employ,
  And stand in your place, though in our actions
  Similar woos not you nor me:
  So, when your letters, in their usual style,
  Call ashamed language upon themselves,
  And add, 'This writer's style is that of your pen,'
  Which in our notes of argument is true.
    So, in the one note, at my elbow,
    They report on my behalf, in my name;
    In the other, on your behalf.

  LXXXIX

  'Fair is fair, if thou wilt swear,' said the queen,
  When thou play'st with the harp;
  And play'st thou that note, in tune of thine ear,
  That when I praise thee, all the while wailing,
  At thy praise I swear an oath mayst not be.
  Fair is fair if thou wilt swear truthfully;
  And for that honour, if any, is creep'd in thine ear,
  To swear by another, of more truth than thou hast:
  So, fair is she that from thy face more surface
  Than skin would tend, to make thy complexion shine.
    Fair is she that from thy face thou wilt be seen,
    And thy complexion shall live in memory.

  XC

  Love is, as nature made it, against our will,
  Ungrateful, cruel, and in many instances, cruel;
  But, for our great virtue it was born,
  And for nothing the wretch toil'd.
  For it is said that 'Nature's spite is wilful',
  And that she hath 'planted' some useful weed,
  In expectation of our great times';
  But that said weed she did not plant, but left
  A fouler symptom to disgrace her face when it grew.
    Thus do I pine
====================
The deep strain that this burthen doth bear

Can hardly be felt in outward beauty,

Nor discerned in the gleam of eyes
 Which elsewhere doth this bogus pomp lie.

Look in the mirror, and there is none:

Then look in the book of thy life,
 And in that thou mayst from our deeds unravel
 The tale of thy birth, thy deserts,
 And thy wasting days; then thou mayst ask
 Why thy bad years are wasting so long in thy supply:
 Then, if from our wailing bosoms thou seek
 To grieve us with bitter words full many times,
 For thou know'st we are wailing equally;
  And that some months are better than others,
  For months are years in love, and some vices
  Like fingers in the seasons change their season.
    So thou ponder'st on these and other woes
    Which, like misfortunes, are as yet unkind.

  CXIII

  Like as the waves make towards the pebbled shore
  Which, by and with the help of this inscription,
  Hold their course together till the blessed flush
  Which in their progress makes them boil and sourest
  In one clear stream which nowhere am I.
  This blessed hope hath my pen, and they that print
  Without my stamp I give no approval;
  But I grant their sacred right,--
  To thee they do not formally pledge,
  And so they do not confidently mark their authors.
    So they who in thee we trust,
    And so I in thee they do honour.

  CXIV

  Or I may be mistaken in thinking that your love is of my deed,
  Since, in truth, your love is no love at all,
  But is rather a dislike, more or less,
  That your liking hath no love in it.
  Or may it be, possibly, that your liking
  Feels more than mine abhorreth?
  Or are you more strongly represented there,
  Whereas mine am writing of yours, and all you are
  Too proud to appear in the open road?
  Or are you more favourably represented there,
  Since, in truth, you are so strongly represented there,
  That mine own desert, being most account'd,
  Featur'd the appearance of more, more honour being given.
    Yea, and I will willingly update our tale,
    To make our late encounter more like day.

  CXV

  Whilst I alone did call your name, you alone
  Were my sole object, my sole object in view;
  So then, if you will but look on my grace,
  I can do all that I will from you;
  For, you in my sight, none else can show
  That you are more than mine; then, all superiority
  Awaits your tasting, and you to my defence!
  And so, whenever I will call your name,
  You also will excuse my calling you by,
  Looking on such merit only as your merit doth bear.
    For if I call you to justify calling,
    You justify my calling you by my not calling you there.

  CXVI

  Were you but the child of mine eyes, I should doubt
  Whether your sweet glance could ever have told
  What marvellous gift childhood had in store
  For sweet words, arts, and practices so seldom display?
  Were you but the result of my deeds, I should doubt
  Whether you could spot my fickle pace;
  For so early in the spring did beauty appear
  That bears my name, even to this date.
  But since you are even now springing up,
  And I seem'd doubtful of your beauty,
  Resembling autumn, yet your beauty seem'd betwixt;
    And you seem'd doubtful of my beauty, because you seem'd doubtful of my skill.

  CXVII

  Or I should be wroth with myself if I could prove
  That you love being slight, being your slave,
  Being tongue-tied in your master's speak;
  For then, compared with you, I should be wroth to ply,
  And you still would not renounce my armour:
  So, to be sure, I might inflict wound,
  On that part of myself that keeps you as my ward,
  And you still would not desert me, for you know
  That you were bidden to stay, and will stay;
    For you know that your obedience will be
    Wh
====================
